# ATEL #17093							     ATEL #17093
Title:	[IXPE detects a remarkably high X-ray Polarization Degree in
		a faint hard state of IGR J17091-3624](https://www.astronomerstelegram.org/?read=17093)

- Author:	M. Parra (Ehime University), M. Dovciak (Czech Academy of
		Sciences), M. Ewing (Newcastle University), G. Mastroserio (Universita
		degli Studi di Milano), M. Del Santo (INAF-IASF Palermo), J. Garcia
		(NASA Goddard), A. Veledina (University of Turku), A. Ingram (Newcastle
		University), G. Matt, S. Bianchi (Universita Roma Tre), P.-O. Petrucci
		(Universite Grenoble-Alpes), P. Gandhi (University of Southampton),
		M. Shidatsu (Ehime University), T. Russell (INAF-IASF Palermo) on
		behalf of a larger collaboration
- Queries:	maxime.parrastro@gmail.com
- Posted:	20 Mar 2025; 16:48 UT
- Subjects:X-ray, Black Hole, Transient

- The Black Hole X-ray candidate IGR J17091-3624, first detected in 2003
(ATel #149) and well known for its recurrent outbursts and exotic variability
patterns reminiscent of GRS 1915+105 (<a href="https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011ApJ...742L..17A/abstract">Altamirano
et al. 2011, ApJL, 742, L17</a>; <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stx773">Court
et al. 2017, MNRAS, 468, 4748</a>; <a href="https://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad1595">Wang
et al., ApJ 963, 14, +2024</a>), was detected to undergo a new outburst
in early February (ATels #17034, #17038, #17065). During the following
month, high-cadence monitoring with Swift/XRT confirmed that the source
remained in a purely hard spectral state, with a progressive decline in
flux from 7e-10 erg/s/cm^2 (1-10keV band, unabsorbed) to ~3e-10 erg/s/cm^2
between February 14 and March 12.

- The Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer (IXPE) observed the source from
2025-03-07T07:17 to 2025-03-10T18:51, for a total of 163ks. Our analysis
reveals a very significant (>5 sigma) polarization measurement, with a
background subtracted Polarization Degree of PD = ( 9.3 +/- 1.8 )% and
Polarization Angle of PA = ( 82 +/- 5 ) deg in the 2-8keV band (errors
at a 1 sigma confidence level).

- Simultaneous NuSTAR observations at the beginning and end of the IXPE exposure
confirm hard state properties, with a spectrum dominated by a gamma~1.6
component, and a type-C QPO in the PDS. The flux of the source slightly
decreased from 3.8e-10 to 3.3e-10 erg/s/cm^2 (1-10keV band, unabsorbed)
over that period.

- Follow-up observations and monitoring of the evolution of the source in
the low-hard state are strongly encouraged.

- We thank the IXPE, NuSTAR, NICER, and Swift operation teams for their efforts
in scheduling the steps of this campaign.
